CUBE2FONT(1)		       cube2font Manual 		  CUBE2FONT(1)



NAME
       cube2font - Utility program designed to create font bitmaps for Cube
       Engine games

SYNOPSIS
       cube2font infile outfile outborder[:inborder] pad offset advance
       charwidth charheight texwidth texheight [spacewidth spaceheight texdir]

DESCRIPTION
       cube2font is a utility program designed to create font bitmaps for Cube
       Engine games, it works by taking a Truetype font and building it into a
       set of coordinates in an image. cube2font is an improved version of the
       previous TTF2Font, supporting a much larger range of characters.

       The program outputs one or more PNG images containing a grid of
       characters, so-called "texes", and an accompanying config file in
       plaintext, which lists the character coordinates in the images.

PARAMETERS
       infile
	      Path to input file in truetype format.

       outfile
	      Sets the font name in the config file, and is also used as an
	      output filename template: A number and the .png extension will
	      be appended to the texes, and a .cfg extension to the coordinate
	      file.

       outborder
	      Size of black outside border around each character on the texes.

       inborder
	      Size of black border between the elements inside each character.

       pad
	      Added padding around characters on the texes, to prevent them
	      "bleeding" into neighbouring characters.

       offset
	      Added spacing to the left of each character when they are
	      rendered ingame. If exaggerated it would look something like
	      this:

	      |   A|   B|

       advance
	      Added spacing to the right of each character when they are
	      rendered ingame. If exaggerated it would look something like
	      this:

	      |A   |B	|

       charwidth
	      Width of generated characters on the texes.

       charheight
	      Height of generated characters on the texes.

       texwidth
	      Width of generated texes.

       texheight
	      Height of generated texes.

       spacewidth
	      Width of the standard space character size when rendered ingame,
	      defaults to a third of spaceheight if omitted or set to 0.

       spaceheight
	      Height of the vertical character separation when rendered
	      ingame, defaults to the maximum vertical character range if
	      omitted or set to 0. This value is normally larger than
	      charheight, since it takes into account characters extending
	      outside the 'em' box. This value will make the rendered
	      characters scale to fit.

       texdir
	      Sets the font directory path in the config file.

EXAMPLES
       cube2font Play-Bold.ttf play 4 15 1 1 54 54 512 512 0 0 fonts/
	   Generates a font named play with a 4 pixel black border, an
	   additional 15 pixels of space around characters, one pixel of extra
	   spacing at both sides when displayed ingame, a character size of
	   54x54 pixels, a tex size of 512x512 pixels, a 23 pixels wide
	   standard space character, a 71 pixels high standard vertical line
	   separation, and the font path set as fonts/

	   This would normally generate the files
	   play.cfg
	   play0.png
	   play1.png
	   play2.png

	   The above values are used for the base font.

       cube2font default.ttf default 3 19 1 1 49 49 512 512 32 64 packages/fonts/
	   This generates the default font for the cube2 game Sauerbraten.

AUTHORS
       cube2font was created by Lee "eihrul" Salzman.

       This manual page was written by Martin Erik Werner
       <martinerikwerner@gmail.com>



cube2font 1.3			  2012-07-16			  CUBE2FONT(1)

This text file was automatically generated from cube2font.1
Please do not edit it manually.
