THE RED ECLIPSE MARK POLICY


  General Guidelines

The purpose of the Red Eclipse mark policy is to encourage the widespread use of
Red Eclipse marks by the community while controlling the use of the marks in
order to avoid confusion on the part of software users and the general public,
to maintain the value of the image and reputation of the marks and to protect
them from inappropriate or unauthorized use.

Any use of any Red Eclipse mark must be in accordance with this policy. Any use
that does not comply with our trademark policy is not authorized.

Marks cover the following items: The name "Red Eclipse", the Red Eclipse emblem
(without text) and the Red Eclipse logo (with word art text).

Do not assume that this policy will answer every question about the use of Red
Eclipse marks, if in doubt, contact the Red Eclipse project.


  Permitted Use

You may use the marks without prior written permission (subject to the following
terms):

1. To refer to the Red Eclipse software in substantially unmodified form.

  "Substantially unmodified" for source code means built from the source code
  provided by The Red Eclipse project, possibly with minor modifications
  including but not limited to: the enabling or disabling of certain features by
  default, translations into other languages, changes required for compatibility
  with a particular operating system distribution, the inclusion of bug-fix
  patches, or the bundling of additional extensions.

  "Substantially unmodified" for gameplay and art means using the game data
  provided by The Red Eclipse project, possibly with minor modifications, for
  example including additional maps, artwork, and sounds. The gameplay and art
  needs to closely resemble that of Red Eclipse in it's unmodified form, and not
  create an unfair advantage in gameplay.

  Example: You may modify Red Eclipse to start in windowed mode by default, but
           if you set the gravity in the game to zero, this counts as a
           substantial modification.

  Example: You may modify the laser beams to be green instead of purple, but if
           you change all the weapon models into fresh fruits, this counts as a
           substantial modification.

2. To identify Red Eclipse as a distinct component of a software offering.

3. To factually refer to The Red Eclipse project itself, its products, or its
   protocols.

   Example: You may use "Bob's Add-ons for Red Eclipse" or
            "Bob's forum for Red Eclipse" but not "Bob's Red Eclipse".

4. When referring to Red Eclipse that is substantially modified, to say
   that such software is a "derivative of" or "based on" Red Eclipse. You may
   use the marks as part of the name of a product designed to work with Red
   Eclipse, so long as the name as a whole (via its other components) clearly
   and unambiguously distinguishes the product from Red Eclipse, and the
   general presentation of the product does not imply any official association
   or identity with the Red Eclipse project.


  Non Permitted Use

You may not use the marks in the following ways:

1. In any way likely to cause confusion as to the identity of the Red Eclipse
   project, the origin of its software, or the software's license.

2. In any way that indicates a greater degree of association between you and
   Red Eclipse project than actually exists.

3. In any way that implies a designated successor to Red Eclipse
   (e.g., "Red Eclipse++" is not permitted).

4. In any way that indicates that the Red Eclipse project favours one
   distribution, platform, product, etc. over another except where explicitly
   indicated in writing by the Red Eclipse project.

5. In any way that promotes the use of third party services over those provided
   by Red Eclipse.

6. In any way that could be deemed harmful or disruptive to the Red Eclipse
   community and/or project.

Thus uses of the marks in a domain name or company name without explicit written
permission from the Red Eclipse project are prohibited.


  Other Legal Notes

The Red Eclipse project reserves the sole right to:

1. Determine compliance with this policy.

2. Modify this policy to preserve the rights of Red Eclipse, the public, the
   community, and the users.
   The latest version of the Red Eclipse Mark Policy should be available at
   <http://redeclipse.net/wiki/Trademark_Policy>

3. Grant exceptions to this policy, of any kind and for any reason whatsoever,
   other clauses notwithstanding.


  Other Use

If you have questions regarding the policy, or if any of the examples are
unclear, feel free to contact the Red Eclipse project, for example via the
Red Eclipse forums.

If you would like to use the Red Eclipse marks for any other use, please contact
us and we'll discuss a way to make that happen. We don't have strong objections
to people using the name for their websites and businesses, but we do need the
chance to review such use.

In other words, it's not a big deal, and a short conversation (via the forums
for example) should clear everything up in short order.

If you currently have a product that is using the Red Eclipse marks in a way
that don't follow this policy, don't panic. Let us know, and we'll work it out,
as described above.


  Attribution

This text is Copyright (C) 2011-2016, the Red Eclipse Team
and is available under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported
License <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/>

A large portion of the content in this text is based on
<http://wiki.documentfoundation.org/TradeMark_Policy>
which is Copyright (C) 2011, The Document Foundation
and is available under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported
License <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/>

Additionally, some content is based on
<http://www.softwarefreedom.org/resources/2008/foss-primer.html#x1-700005.6>
which is Copyright (C) 2006, 2007, 2008, Software Freedom Law Center, Inc.
and is available under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 US
License <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/us/>
